Special Relativity and Space Time (prepare to use you brains for once - some of you at least)

Intro:
Space + Time  =  Spacetime (insane!!)
Ok, but what does it mean? Well time is time, and space is space so we can just combine the two, right?
Well yes, so when we walk in lets say 2d, the time will flow and the space will change, quite simple spacetime.
Okay so we added time to space, but what if we add space to time? Now thats getting weird, what does that mean.
Just like before, now the time is bounded by space and its properties are being put in visual place, we can measure its position (coordinates).
Now here big thanks to Sabine Hossenfelder (Special Relativity: This Is Why You Misunderstand It) great video, and i will be using contents of it from this point on for a bit. The big piece we are missing is the way of saying where you are, in space(2d or 3d or higher) you can give sb your coordinates and they will know where you are, but they don't know how to get there the fastest or how long will it take, its not encoded in your coordinates. But as we said before we merge time and space together so this fact should stay true, but look what happens now, you send me your position and time. Lets say we have a meeting at 8pm in a mall, now i will be in the mall but i have no idea how i will get there, by foot(3km) by train 8(km) or car(5km), the journey there can be vastly different, now the big thing this also works the same with TIME! So the meeting is at 8pm, its 4pm now, so the meeting is in 4 hours, well not really, just as space the time of the meeting is just a convenient way of saying what time is it there. Now this doesn't tell you in how long the meeting will take place. And thats where people get confused, it might take me 2 hours, but i will be where you want me to be at 8pm, or it might take me 12hr to get there. The passage of time for me might not be the same as for the mall, all things experience time, so when we say 8pm at the mall is just simply saying "8pm for the mall" and no we aren't taking about timezones here. So now the big question is what in the fuc# am i even taking about?

Spacetime(explained.....kinda):
I cant really explain 4d or 3d in just plain text so lets stick to 2d for a while. Let's imagine a (x,y) coordinate system, we are quite familiar with it. Now lets talk about two points in this x,y space, we can easily find distance between these two called Euclidean Distance sqrt(x^2 + y^2) just difference in x-es and y-s, for now lets compress the space even more to just 1d, so only left or right, and lets add a second axis to the mix being a time coordinate. So spacetime will have a time and space to it (t,x) where t is a time of an action and x is its position. Now if we do the same in spacetime, so take the difference in time and space and take the distance formula we get sqrt(t^2 - (x/c)^2) called the Lorentzian Distance. That make a lot of sense if you think about it, this way two events cant be happening and......no it doesn't, what in the hell is that, why is s divided by speed of light and most importantly why is there a minus instead of a plus like normally? Let's start with the minus situation , the funny thing is that there isn't an explaination for this, it just IS. Ye... Sometimes in physics there are things that just work for no apparent reason, we call them fundamental laws, they have no background, they just are. Like a speed of light, why it is thats its constant in all refrence frames? Nobody knows, it just is. You may think im bullshitting you, but im not, the minus is there cause the math simply works, we got this equation by pure guessing from results and this single minus causes a lot and i mean a LOT of things to change. For now lets toss the (x/c)^2 over the fence we will get to it a bit later. How about we get into another weird things just to clarify things further, for space time where time is an axis and space in the other axis a line of an object moving at the speed of light has 45degrees, or in other words has derivative of 1. Why you may ask? .......... You already know whats im about to say. Just cause. In physics people often tend to just simplify things a lot, so in normal units the speed of light is just c=1. and so for one year of time, one light-year of distance comes, and so the line is just a normal straight line where for "ax+b", a = 1. Now let's explain words i will use further in, "Proper time" in short its just a length of a curve in space-time calculated using Lorentzian Distance this means the same as the time measured by an observer who is at rest relative to the event being observed. And so the time coordinate is just a label, you can check that if an observer isnt moving so the change in "x" is 0, his change in location is zero then the equation becomes: sqrt(t^2) = t, so if you arent moving the proper time becomes the difference in label time. In easier words if you are moving, the time starts to change differently, we dont notice it cause the change is so tiny its unnoticable. How about we take a look at Lonrentzian Distance yet again, lets say you are staying still so your line in spacetime is straight up, the only thing that changes is the coordinate time, now lets take Kevin, who is moving at constant speed, and so his line will also be straight but also tilted by some angle to the right. And so Kevin starts moving towards where you are, and he gets there after a while but again this minus causes some problems, cause sqrt(t^2 - (x/c)^2) decreases as "x" gets bigger. Now this again is called proper time, and so even tho the line of Kevin is longer, what this tells us is that less proper time passed for him than for you. BUT here is the thing, absolute speed is relative, i can be moving at constant speed for you or you can be moving at constant speed for me it doesnt matter. Now if for Kevin you are moving then less time passed for you to get to him. But for you less time passed for him. Soooo what do we do about that? For now we can keep that question in the back of our minds for a few minutes.

Physical problems(acceleration, velocity,gravity):
First of all we know that velocity is relative, and so that acceleration isn't, but there is a big fluke of how we understand the idea of acceleration, the key concept is that the change of direction is also an acceleration. This is sth even Newton had problems to understand, and so we get the famous Newton bucket paradox, which isnt a paradox. It goes like that, we fill a bucket half full with water, and then we spin the bucket, now water will go outside and will create a hole in the middle, now water was at rest relative to the bucket and after we spin it, they are still at rest relative to each other, but now the shape of the water changed, so something must be going on here. This can be explained really easily, cause now we know that this change in direction also counts like acceleration. Now that we cleared that part, let's just say this here: Gravity is NOT a force. Gravity is a result of curvature of spacetime, now i heard that sentence 50 times aleady, but what does that really mean. If you fall in a gravitational field you do not accelerate, if we jump from a building we dont feel anything, we fell weightless just like in a vaccum, so no forces are acting on you. Now let me try to explain this thing, why do things accelerate on Earth but gravity is not a force then? So imagine the space time as a rubber sheet, and if we place a heavy object in the middle the things around t start to move towards it faster and faster, even tho we dont ut ny additionalforce on them, their movement is purely thanks to the paththey take which is always a path of least action and so they folow a straightlike towards the centre of mass which in our cause is the middle of Earth, so objects in this 4d spacetime will follow a straight line towards the centre of Earth, and thats exactly what we see, if we throw an object up it will fall down in a way that requires least action, but still towards the centre of mass of the object pulling it. And so the weight of the object or the object itself doesnt cause other hings to move, it curves the 4d space nd the objects before at rest now can move towards the new point in spacetime where they have less energy, and so if we drop things into a dip they will fall into it. And so if we place an object very high n that ruber sheet it will start movig but slowly, the closer we place it the faster it will fall. So the acceleration depends on the distance, so we acclereate slower on top of the mountain than on the surface of the ocean, and as a fact time slows down the the closer we get to the centre of Earth, so the clock on Everes will move faster than the same clock under the sea. So from this we get the main purpose of this part, "Time slows down more the stronger the graviy it is in"

Was Newton wrong(relativity, equations)?:       "Feynman lectures pt.15 ( "The Special Theory of Relativity")"
Newton was a REALLY smark guy, way ahead of his time, but even tho his idea of motion was correct, there was a problem with it that some random guy called Einstein found out. For Newton F = d(mv)/dt now the corrected formula that Einstein discovered changed the core concept of mass: m=m(0)/(sqrt(1-x^2/c^2)) where m(0) = "rest mass" so the mass an object has while stationary, ok, wait, wait, wait what do you mean mass while stationary? I get the idea but mass is the same it doesn't matter if you are moving right? right..... Well, no. It actually changes with your speed, as the equation above says, but you dont notice it cause the change is so minimal for things that are not even close to the speed of light. Now Newton proposed an idea of relativity in a sense that if an experiment was conducted in a train that was moving at constant speed, the results wouldnt differ from these made while stationary, so in other words constant speed doesn't change anything*. Its all good and sweet until Maxwell comes into the picture and gives us equations, that behave differently while moving at const. speed and so we have a very important question to answer who is wrong here? And so the first obvious thing to do was to check the newly found Maxwell's equations, and it failed, the equations seemed to be fine, every minor change made in them lead to some strange results. But all of a sudden a man called Lorentz while playing around with the forementioned Maxwell's equations found out that if we change some of the parameters in them and divide some of them by sqrt(1-v^2/c^2) their form remains the same as before. And this change was called a Lorentz transformation, some of the smart minds at the time proposed that everything to which this Lorentz transformation was applied would remain the same, one of them was Einstein who figured that the only change needed for it to work for Newton's equation was this mass equation we saw at the beggining. This journey lead scientists to believe that there isn't a single experiment one can do to determine whether or not or how fast one is moving at const. speed without any refrence frames. So the big question: Was Newton wrong? Kinda. He was right that speed was indeed relative and acceleration was the absolute one, but his equation was quite simply off by a little bit. He didn't realize that the mass of an object changed with its speed which i think we can forgive him for missing.

Light cones, past, black hole, time travel:
If you dont know what the coversation is about, its about money or black holes. Explaining them is pointless, we all know objects with singiularities, that light cannot escape from and so on. Also don't skip this part if you know about black holes already, this is more like an intruduction into time dialation but using BH (black holes). So, i heard people say warped spacetime slows down time to distant observers for 2 years, and never understood why, just why is that. Now i think i have a better idea of this concept so let me try to make you a little bit smarter. To help us understand this lets use a BH, this guy makes all things extreme, gravity itself is very very weak compared to magnetism for example, but the BH makes things so over the top, and so we get a super strong source of gravity, and as always you can imagine it as a sheet of rubber and a ball on it, just warping it. Now we understand the idea of space warping around it, cause thats how this rubber analogy works it quite easy, but again dont forget that we are working in spaceTIME here so what about time then. It also gets warped, but now thats a lot more annoying to understand, like how do we visualize time warping? We really cant do that, but we can make some analogies, imagine that the gravity is "stealing" some energy from processes being done in it. One of them is what we call time passing, so it makes it harder for the clock to tick, like you trying to walk underwater, you are doing the same thing, putting the same amount of power into it, but you move slower cause water is putting more pressure on you than just air. This effect is very mild, unless you have a stupidly strong gravitational field, just like BH have, and so in films like Interstellar, they appear like a final "boss". This is a very powerful way to interpret this phenomenon, think of it like standing on the surface of the strange ocean, the stronger the gravity around you is the deeper you go into the liquid, now the key idea is that unlike just water the deeper you go the thicker the liquid is, so we have oil at the top, then water but 1km deep we have honey,  then 3km deep we have cement and so on, and the deeper you go every action you do is slowed down cause its getting harder and harder to move. And we see this effect as time slowing down, and this may be true but remember EVERYTHING slows down, so time slows itself down, cause its a process like any other. Imagine you go around and put handcuffs on every person you see but you also put them on yourself, so it takes you longer to put them on sb else, time is preety much doing the same. This may be a bit complicated, so let me give you my fav. example i ever saw on a topic. You had a bad day at school, and so you go to the gym to stress out, you hop on a treadmill to do some cardio before going to heavy lifting. And so you start it and walk, you decide to use only 50% of your power to do so, after 5 min you get bored and you click a button to lift the from side by 10degrees up, so you walk a bit uphill, remember you are only using 50% of power all the time. So what happens now? Well its getting harder to move, so you have to slow down the treadmill to still use only 50%. So you are using the same amount of energy to move, but you are going slower? This shouldn't make sense but now it doesn't look weird, of course you slow down you are going uphill. Lets increase it by 50degrees, so we have a 60degree angle right now, this is a really tough walk, you have to slow down a lot now to not get tired, but now you are going only 0.5m/s which is very slow, but you are using 50% still. You get the idea right? The bigger the angle the slower you need to go to not get tired. Okay i promise this is the last one, the idea of time needing a specific amount of energy to flow is just simply wrong, it works wonders cause it makes things easier to understand, but its not quite right. Now it is time for the most accurate representation of time dialation, but i had to show you these before cause it will make this part much easier to consume.
Imagine you are standing on the edge of a cliff, and you have a source of light 1 light year down, now lets say, light can only move on the ground, so it cant "fly" or go through the ground. Its quite easy to see that it will take it 1 year to get to you. Now you step back yourself, so the edge of a cliff is 1 light year away from you. So first the light will have to go out of the cliff and then to you, so 2 years needed, everything makes sense. But now lets try sth weird, lets observe and decode 3 ideas. First one we already saw, it will take 2 years, second one is what if we take the shortest distance from the source of light to you, so a straight line of length sqrt(2)*(light year) but this will need the light to pass through the ground which it can't so this is out, now what if we lift the cliff 1 light year up? Why would we do that? Try to remember the most basic time equation v=s/t, so t=s/v the v will always be equal to c(speed of light) but what is the road distance here? The big idea Einstein proposed was that, the distance was much simpler it was a difference in x coordinates, so the curvature of space doesnt affect it at all, only thing that matters is the change in "x" horizontal, so the road/x difference in this case is 1 ligh year, this 1 light year up the cliff doesn't matter, its like a distance from Earth to Sun, its just a distance between them, we don't care about gravity while measuring distance. And so from the perspective of you who is waiting for the light it will come after 1 year cause thats your distance. But what if we take a look at it from the light's perspective, it crossed 2 light years with speed c, but for the observer it was still 1 year, so the light moved at speed c/2. But you stupid fucking idiot MB it can't do that!@!7219& You said it yourself the speed of light is c always! for it to work the time for the observer and the light itself would have to be different so that the speed of light would stay the same, but that can't happe.......ohhh. The observer waited 1 year for the light but light took 2 years to get there. And both of them are correct, this limitation of the speed of light causes something we call time dialation as we saw before. This is the key concept of this part, time can move differently for everyone, but we cant say the universla time, its a thing unique for every object in the universe, and depending how you move or where you are it can slow down or speed up. I will explain it more using mathematics in next part so dont worry if you dont get it exactly. Now lets talk about sth else, but not less interesting at all: Light Cones. How about we start with an easy example, if you take a flashlight in the middle of a night and turn it on, it will cerate a light cone, simple enough, but now we go yet again to spacetime. Imagine your flashlight yet again, now instead of it shining forward it goes in all directions so it creates a sphere now this sphere will create a boundary. And no matter what you do you cannot move outside of it. Why? Its quite simple, it moves at a speed of light, so for you to move outside of it you would have to move faster than light which as we already know is impossible. Now if we scale the space down to 2d and include a vertical time axis, this sphere will turn into a cone. Also called a light cone, we also introduce sth called a "Future light cone" this is the exact cone the light passed but we just streth it to infinity. This is a very important part now, "Everything that happens outside your Future light cone, you will not be aware of", this isnt exactly true, but the problem with this isnt a part of what i want to show, so we will skip that(feel free to update yourself on new physics breakthroughs, which break this law in a tiny way). The main takeaway is, you cannot interact with anything outside your Future light cone. It doesnt matter how long you live, it is already outside of your reach. But as we can move forward we can also move back into the "Past Light Cone". Your past light cone is a record of everything in the universe that could have influenced you up to this moment. Let that sink in. Light cones are a boundary of your interactions with the universe, even if sth exists outside of one, you cannot know it, cause the information would have to move faster than light. You may now think, but are these a universal shape for everything? Cause if we think about it like that, then everything has a light cone no matter if its dead or alive right? Yes thats true, but as you saw before preety much everything can bend, light, time, space so why wouldnt light cones. Near BH these light cones shrink dramatically, limiting what you can influence or observe. The smallest angle a light cone can have is 45degrees, cause thats how it will look like for an object in a perfectly flat spacetime, even more i would say, everything existing in a flat spacetime will have a light cone tilted by 45degrees cause nothing will disturb it. As we approach a strong gravitational field, gravitational time dilation comes into play, we know time slows down near massive objects, this makes the cone appear narrower cause less "future" time is accessible to the light, cause for this observer it seems like every other clock is ticking faster. That's if for the light introduction, how about a bit more scientific approach. Lets define a space called a "Minkowski's spacetime" in it there is no curvature, no gravity and no external forces, in such a place a light cone is perfectly symmetrical, this is how we define flat space time most of the time, as a reminder we use units where 1=c, so that the speed of light has a 45degree angle. This will not be the case for a curved spacetime, the more extreme version of this phenomenon will take effect near BH obviously, at the event horizon the light cone will tilt completely inward, pointing towards the singularity, it will no longer point outside of the horizon cause the light can never reach it, as we make it inside a BH the cone continues to tilt inward, but here comes the single most weird phenomenon i never heard about. Inside the Event Horizon time and space effectively switch roles: the singularity becomes as inevitable as moving forward in time. The radial direction toward the singularity behaves like time. You can no longer stop yourself from moving toward the singularity, just as you can’t stop moving forward in time in normal spacetime. Outside the event horizon, moving toward or away from the black hole is a choice, like moving through space. Inside, moving toward the singularity is no longer optional—it’s a one-way journey, just as time flows forward for us.  Just like with time dialation lets use a fun little analogy, imagine you standing by a river, you can either jump in or stay on the shore. But if you jump in and a current takes you near the waterfall, then your future becomes clearly defined, no matter what you do you will fall in, your freedom of space doesn't exist anymore. But wait, won't time move normally? So why is it now just like space, can we move back in time in a BH? I thought this was impossible! And you would be correct, time for an observer would still flow the same way in a BH, but now instead of controling where we will fall, we dictate how long it will take but not in a normal moving way. We are shifting in time now, this shift may cause the fall to be longer or shorter so we have freedom of how long we will fall, but not if we will fall, that is bound to happen. Also as a fun fact you will never really enter a BH from sb else's perspective, you will be stuck in the Event Horizon cause the light of you entering a BH won't reach anyone.

Time dilation(maths):
Okay so now its time to look at Time dilation from the more in close perspection, first of all definition: "Time dilation occurs when time is observed to pass at different rates for two observers who are either moving relative to each other (relative velocity time dilation) or in different gravitational fields (gravitational time dilation).". We will start with (Special Relativity) which describes flat spacetime: t' = t/(sqrt(1-v^2/c^2)), where: t = Proper Time (time interval measured by the stationary observer or the one at rest to the event), t' = Dilated Time (time interval measured by the moving observer), v = Relative velocity between the observers, and c = Speed of light. So if v = 0 then, t=t', and as v->c then t' -> infinity, so as we get closer to the speed of light the slower the time passes.
Example: For a spcaeship moving at 80% speed of light, t' = t/0.6, which means that for one hour of Proper time, it measures 1.67 hours. Now we go into General Relativity which covers curved spacetime: t' = t*sqrt(1-(2*G*M/r*c^2)), where G = Gravitational constant, M = Mass of the gravitational source, r = radial distance from the centre of the gravitational source and the rest is the same as before. Here we get a similar effect as before, but now as r->infinity then t'->t, and as r-> 2GM/c^2 so called the Schwarzschild radius, t'->0, so time stops completely near the event horizon of a black hole. Example: If we take the mass of our Earth and its radius we get that t' for the surface of our planet is t'=t*(1-3.48*10^-10) so around 0.999999999652. As you can see not really much of a difference, so sorry but you cant really blame Einstein for you being late. These two effects most of the times obviously work together, but in case of the examples i provided, there is no gravity in Special Relativity so the second equation doesn't hold cause mass becomes zero, and in the second we calculate this t' for observers on the surface of Earth, and they are indeed in rest with it, so their time in the first equation is just the Proper time. Now for the comet, aliens or satellites these two equations combine into one of the general form: 

The Great Paradox:  ("I Never Understood Why The Future Already Exists ... Until Now!" by FloatHeadPhysics)
So far everything we talked about needed some extreme conditions to work, this paradox is quite the interesting one. Here i will explain the one called "Arndromeda paradox", it's very easy to understand but also very deep to think about. Let's imagine two clocks, remember we went through something called 
a Doppler Effect, now that thing showed us a difference in frequency if we move towards the wave or away from it, quite straightforward. Now bear in mind that, velocity is absolute, it doesn't matter if you move at const. speed or if everything around you is. The idea of you being at rest or everything else being at rest is as true as the other, its the same thing. So you are standing and not moving, you build a device that sends a signal in all directions, and you position two clocks one on the right and one on the left of the machine, each 2m away from it. And so you start the device the signal is produced and it hits both clocks at the same time, and they start working at the same time so they are in sync. Now what if someone else beside you was running at const. speed, well from the law of absolute velocity, we can assume he is at rest and everything else is moving, so the clocks, the device, and you even tho you are standing towards the runner. If we repeat the experiment and send a signal, from the device it will now hit the clock on the right first then the one on the left, causing both of the clocks to be out of sync. So before they were but for him running they are not, ye but how much out of sync are they? Well... something like 10^-15 sec. And so we do need a really fast runner to see the difference in time of the clocks. Now here is the thing, if we increase the distance between the clocks to lets say 100m, then the effect will get stronger to sth like 10^-13 sec, and clocks here arent really important, the key idea is that any process that happened for you standing has already happened for the runner. Its again just that the difference is too small to notice, but what is we look somewhere far away, and it so happens that if we stare at the Galaxy, in this example the Andromeda Galaxy, this shift in time, even tho the runner is next to you, and is moving at like 5km/h he sees the Galaxy FEW DAYS forward. Yes FEW DAYS! Here is the analogy, two aliens are talking about invading Earth, so for you standing they are having a conversation, for the runner next to you, they are already flying towards out planet. Wtf is happening, how can that make sense? This rises two problems, if a runner stops moving will he be able to look back in time on the Andromeda? And even more important one being is future real? The faster the runner the further he will see forward, and so that means actions of everything will lead to some result, and so everything we do and will do is already determined, there is no free will at this point, if everything we do has already been decided then are our theories about probabilistic processes of matter wrong, if so all of quantum mechanics can go to trash, cause it all stands on the idea of collapsing a wave function, which is essentially the same as picking one action at random from all possible. The paradox here is that none of them are wrong, for them the idea of "now" is just simply different, this also depicts the Relativity of Simultaneity, which states that what one observer considers "happening now" at a distant location (like Andromeda) depends on their motion relative to that location. This also doesn't break the idea of Communication of Information, cause Andromeda is 2.5 milion light years away so none of them can influence or even verify Andromeda's state instantaneously, and yet again speed of light ensures that no information regarding Andromeda can reach Earth for 2.5 milion years.



































